Architecture.md: Initial draft (#1471)
PyO3/pyo3: Architecture.md

<!-- This file contains a rough overview of the PyO3 codebase. -->
<!-- Please do not make descriptions too specific, so that we can easily -->
<!-- keep this file in sync with the codebase. -->

> # PyO3: Architecture.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# PyO3: Architecture
```

This document roughly describes the high-level architecture of PyO3.

> If you want to become familiar with the codebase, you are in the right place!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to become familiar with the codebase you are in the right place!
```

## Overview

PyO3 provides a bridge between Rust and Python, based on the [Python C/API].
Thus, PyO3 has low-level bindings of these API as its core.
On top of that, we have higher-level bindings to operate Python objects safely.
Also, to define Python classes and functions in Rust code, we have `trait PyClass<T>` and a set of

> protocol traits (e.g., `PyIterProtocol`) for supporting object protocols (i.e., `__dunder__` methods).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
protocol traits (e.g. `PyIterProtocol`) for supporting object protocols (i.e. `__dunder__` methods).
```

Author: Maybe American or British choices? https://english.stackexchange.com/a/6896

Reviewer: Ah interesting, I wasn't aware that the Americans did it differently to what I'm used to. In which case either seems fine to me, let's keep what you've written!

> Since implementing `PyClass` requires lots of boilerplates, we have a proc-macro `#[pyclass]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since implementing `PyClass` requires lots of boilerplate, we have a proc-macro `#[pyclass]`.
```

> To summarize, we have mainly four parts in the PyO3 codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To summarize, there are five main parts to the PyO3 codebase.
```

1. Low-level bindings of Python C/API.
  - [`src/ffi`]
2. Bindings to Python objects.
  - [`src/instance.rs`], [`src/types`]
3. `PyClass<T>` and related functionalities
  - [`src/pycell.rs`], [`src/pyclass.rs`]
4. Protocol methods like `__getitem__`.
  - [`src/class`]

> 5. Defining a Python class requires lots of glue code, so we provide proc-macros to simplify the procedure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Procedural macros to simplify usage for users.
```

  - [`src/derive_utils.rs`]
  - [`pyo3-macros`], [`pyo3-macros-backend`]

## Low-level bindings of CPython API
[`src/ffi`] contains wrappers of [Python C/API](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/).

We aim to provide straight-forward Rust wrappers resembling the file structure of 
[`cpython/Include`](https://github.com/python/cpython/tree/v3.9.2/Include).

> However, we still lack some API and continue to refactor the module to completely resemble

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, we still lack some APIs and are continuously updating the the module to match
```

> the CPython's file structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the file contents upstream in CPython.
```

The tracking issue is [#1289](https://github.com/PyO3/pyo3/issues/1289), and contribution is welcome.

> ## Bindings to Python Objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Bindings to Python objects
```

[`src/types`] contains bindings to [built-in types](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html)
of Python, such as `dict` and `list`.

> Due to historical reasons, Python's `object` is called `PyAny` and placed in [`src/types/any.rs`].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For historical reasons, Python's `object` is called `PyAny` in PyO3 and located in [`src/types/any.rs`].
```

> Currently, `PyAny` is a straight-forward wrapper of `ffi::PyObject`, like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, `PyAny` is a straightforward wrapper of `ffi::PyObject`, defined as:
```

```rust
#[repr(transparent)]
pub struct PyAny(UnsafeCell<ffi::PyObject>);
```

All built-in types are defined as a C struct.
For example, `dict` is defined as:
```c
typedef struct {
    /* Base object */
    PyObject ob_base;
    /* Number of items in the dictionary */
    Py_ssize_t ma_used;
    /* Dictionary version */
    uint64_t ma_version_tag;
    PyDictKeysObject *ma_keys;
    PyObject **ma_values;
} PyDictObject;
```

However, we cannot access such a specific data structure with `#[cfg(Py_LIMITED_API)]` set.

> Thus, all builtin objects are implemented as opaque types by wrapping `PyAny`, like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, all builtin objects are implemented as opaque types by wrapping `PyAny`, e.g.:
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, but please let me insert a comma.

> Thus, all builtin objects are implemented as opaque types by wrapping `PyAny`, like:

Author: ```suggestion
Thus, all builtin objects are implemented as opaque types by wrapping `PyAny`, e.g.,:
```

```rust
#[repr(transparent)]
pub struct PyDict(PyAny);
```

Note that `PyAny` is not a pointer, and it is usually used as a pointer to the object in the
Python heap, as `&PyAny`.
This design choice can be changed
(see the discussion in [#1056](https://github.com/PyO3/pyo3/issues/1056)).

Since we need lots of boilerplate for implementing common traits for these types
(e.g., `AsPyPointer`, `AsRef<PyAny>`, and `Debug`), we have some macros in
[`src/types/mod.rs`].

## PyClass

> [`src/pycell.rs`], [`src/pyclass.rs`], and [`src/type_object.rs`] contains types and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`src/pycell.rs`], [`src/pyclass.rs`], and [`src/type_object.rs`] contain types and
```

traits to make `#[pyclass]` work.
Also, [`src/pyclass_init.rs`] and [`src/pyclass_slots.rs`] have related functionalities.

To realize object-oriented programming in C, all Python objects must have the following two fields
at the beginning.
```rust
#[repr(C)]
pub struct PyObject {
    pub ob_refcnt: usize,
    pub ob_type: *mut PyTypeObject,
    ...
}
```
Thanks to this guarantee, casting `*mut A` to `*mut PyObject` is valid if `A` is a Python object.

To ensure this guarantee, we have a wrapper struct `PyCell<T>` in [`src/pycell.rs`] which is roughly:
```rust
#[repr(C)]
pub struct PyCell<T: PyClass> {
    object: crate::ffi::PyObject,
    inner: T,
}
```
Thus, when copying a Rust struct to a Python object, we first allocate `PyCell` on the Python heap and then

> copy `T`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
move `T` into it.
```

Also, `PyCell` provides [RefCell](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cell/struct.RefCell.html)-like methods
to ensure Rust's borrow rules.

> See [the document](https://docs.rs/pyo3/latest/pyo3/pycell/struct.PyCell.html) for more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [the documentation](https://docs.rs/pyo3/latest/pyo3/pycell/struct.PyCell.html) for more.
```

`PyCell<T>` requires that `T` implements `PyClass`.
This trait is somewhat complex and derives many traits, but the most important one is `PyTypeObject`
in [`src/type_object.rs`].
`PyTypeObject` is also implemented for built-in types.

> Type objects are singletons, and all Python types have their unique type objects.

Reviewer: It could be worth noting [PEP 630](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0630/) - we're technically out-of-date by still having singleton type objects. But I doubt we're fixing this any time soon 😅

For example, you can see `type({})` shows `dict` and `type(type({}))` shows `type` in Python REPL.
`T: PyTypeObject` implies that `T` has a corresponding type object.

## Protocol methods
Python has some built-in special methods called dunder, such as `__iter__`.
They are called [abstract objects layer](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/abstract.html) in
Python C/API.
We provide a way to implement those protocols by using `#[pyproto]` and specific traits, such
as `PyIterProtocol`.
[`src/class`] defines these traits.
Each protocol method has a corresponding FFI function.
For example, `PyIterProtocol::__iter__` has
`pub unsafe extern "C" fn iter<T>(slf: *mut PyObject) -> *mut PyObject`.
When `#[pyproto]` finds that `T` implements `PyIterProtocol::__iter__`, it automatically
sets `iter<T>` on the type object of `T`.

Also, [`src/class/methods.rs`] has utilities for `#[pyfunction]` and [`src/class/impl_.rs`] has
some internal tricks for making `#[pyproto]` flexible.

> ## Proc-macros

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Procedural macros
```

[`pyo3-macros`] provides six proc-macro APIs: `pymodule`, `pyproto`, `pyfunction`, `pyclass`,
`pymethods`, and `#[derive(FromPyObject)]`.
[`pyo3-macros-backend`] has the actual implementations of these APIs.

> [`src/derive_utils.rs`] contains some utilities used in codes generated by these proc-macros,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`src/derive_utils.rs`] contains some utilities used in code generated by these proc-macros,
```

> <!-- This file contains a rough overview of PyO3 codebase. -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- This file contains a rough overview of the PyO3 codebase. -->
```

<!-- Please do not make descriptions too specific, so that we can easily -->
<!-- keep this file in sync with the codebase. -->

# PyO3: Architecture.md

This document roughly describes the high-level architecture of PyO3.

> If you are to become familiar with the codebase, you are in the right place!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to become familiar with the codebase, you are in the right place!
```

## Overview

PyO3 provides a bridge between Rust and Python, based on the [Python C/API].
Thus, PyO3 has low-level bindings of these API as its core.
On top of that, we have higher-level bindings to operate Python objects safely.

> Also, to define Python class and functions in Rust code, we have `trait PyClass<T>` and a set of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also, to define Python classes and functions in Rust code, we have `trait PyClass<T>` and a set of
```

protocol traits (e.g., `PyIterProtocol`) for supporting object protocols (i.e., `__dunder__` methods).
Since implementing `PyClass` requires lots of boilerplates, we have a proc-macro `#[pyclass]`.

To summarize, we have mainly four parts in the PyO3 codebase.
1. Low-level bindings of Python C/API.
  - [`src/ffi`]
2. Bindings to Python objects.
  - [`src/instance.rs`], [`src/types`]
3. `PyClass<T>` and related functionalities
  - [`src/pycell.rs`], [`src/pyclass.rs`]
4. Protocol methods like `__getitem__`.
  - [`src/class`]

> 5. Defining a Python class requires lots of glue codes, so we provide proc-macros to simplify the procedure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Defining a Python class requires lots of glue code, so we provide proc-macros to simplify the procedure.
```

  - [`src/derive_utils.rs`]
  - [`pyo3-macros`], [`pyo3-macros-backend`]

## Low-level bindings of CPython API
[`src/ffi`] contains wrappers of [Python C/API](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/).

> We aim to provide straight-forward Rust wrappers and resemble the file structure of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We aim to provide straight-forward Rust wrappers resembling the file structure of 
```

[`cpython/Include`](https://github.com/python/cpython/tree/v3.9.2/Include).

However, we still lack some API and continue to refactor the module to resemble the CPython's

> file structure completely.

Reviewer 2: remove duplicate

> However, we still lack some API and continue to refactor the module to resemble the CPython's
> file structure completely.

Author: ```suggestion
```

However, we still lack some API and continue to refactor the module to completely resemble
the CPython's file structure.
The tracking issue is [#1289](https://github.com/PyO3/pyo3/issues/1289), and contribution is welcome.

## Bindings to Python Objects
[`src/types`] contains bindings to [built-in types](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html)
of Python, such as `dict` and `list`.

> Due to a historical reason, Python's `object` is called `PyAny` and placed in [`src/types/any.rs`].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to historical reasons, Python's `object` is called `PyAny` and placed in [`src/types/any.rs`].
```

Currently, `PyAny` is a straight-forward wrapper of `ffi::PyObject`, like:
```rust
#[repr(transparent)]
pub struct PyAny(UnsafeCell<ffi::PyObject>);
```

> .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

All built-in types are defined as a C struct.
For example, `dict` is defined as:
```c
typedef struct {
    /* Base object */
    PyObject ob_base;
    /* Number of items in the dictionary */
    Py_ssize_t ma_used;
    /* Dictionary version */
    uint64_t ma_version_tag;
    PyDictKeysObject *ma_keys;
    PyObject **ma_values;
} PyDictObject;
```

> .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> However, we cannot access such a specific data structure with `#[cfg(Py_LIMITED_API)]` set.

Reviewer 2: maybe explain the feature flags at the top?

Reviewer: 👍 - it could be worth talking briefly about our `build.rs` also.

Thus, all builtin objects are implemented as opaque types by wrapping `PyAny`, like:
```rust
#[repr(transparent)]
pub struct PyDict(PyAny);
```

Note that `PyAny` is not a pointer, and it is usually used as a pointer to the object in the
Python heap, as `&PyAny`.
This design choice can be changed
(see the discussion in [#1056](https://github.com/PyO3/pyo3/issues/1056)).

> Since we need lots of boilerplates for implementing common traits for these types

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since we need lots of boilerplate for implementing common traits for these types
```

(e.g., `AsPyPointer`, `AsRef<PyAny>`, and `Debug`), we have some macros in
[`src/types/mod.rs`].

## PyClass
[`src/pycell.rs`], [`src/pyclass.rs`], and [`src/type_object.rs`] contains types and
traits to make `#[pyclass]` work.
Also, [`src/pyclass_init.rs`] and [`src/pyclass_slots.rs`] have related functionalities.

To realize object-oriented programming in C, all Python objects must have the following two fields
at the beginning.
```rust
#[repr(C)]
pub struct PyObject {
    pub ob_refcnt: usize,
    pub ob_type: *mut PyTypeObject,
    ...
}
```

> Thanks to this gurantee, casting `*mut A` to `*mut PyObject` is valid if `A` is a Python object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thanks to this guarantee, casting `*mut A` to `*mut PyObject` is valid if `A` is a Python object.
```

> To ensure this gurantee, we have a wrapper struct `PyCell<T>` in [`src/pycell.rs`] which is roughly:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To ensure this guarantee, we have a wrapper struct `PyCell<T>` in [`src/pycell.rs`] which is roughly:
```

```rust
#[repr(C)]
pub struct PyCell<T: PyClass> {
    object: crate::ffi::PyObject,
    inner: T,
}
```

> .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> Thus, when copying a Rust struct to a Python object, we first allocate `PyCell` on a Python heap and then

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus, when copying a Rust struct to a Python object, we first allocate `PyCell` on the Python heap and then
```

> copies `T`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
copy `T`.
```

Also, `PyCell` provides [RefCell](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cell/struct.RefCell.html)-like methods
to ensure Rust's borrow rules.
See [the document](https://docs.rs/pyo3/latest/pyo3/pycell/struct.PyCell.html) for more.

`PyCell<T>` requires that `T` implements `PyClass`.
This trait is somewhat complex and derives many traits, but the most important one is `PyTypeObject`
in [`src/type_object.rs`].
`PyTypeObject` is also implemented for built-in types.

> Type objects are singleton, and all Python types have their unique type objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Type objects are singletons, and all Python types have their unique type objects.
```

For example, you can see `type({})` shows `dict` and `type(type({}))` shows `type` in Python REPL.

> `T: PyTypeObject` implies that `T` has a corresponding type object

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`T: PyTypeObject` implies that `T` has a corresponding type object.
```

## Protocol methods
Python has some built-in special methods called dunder, such as `__iter__`.
They are called [abstract objects layer](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/abstract.html) in
Python C/API.
We provide a way to implement those protocols by using `#[pyproto]` and specific traits, such
as `PyIterProtocol`.
[`src/class`] defines these traits.
Each protocol method has a corresponding FFI function.

> For example, when `PyIterProtocol::__iter__` has

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, `PyIterProtocol::__iter__` has
```

`pub unsafe extern "C" fn iter<T>(slf: *mut PyObject) -> *mut PyObject`.
When `#[pyproto]` finds that `T` implements `PyIterProtocol::__iter__`, it automatically

> set `iter<T>` to the type object of `T`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sets `iter<T>` on the type object of `T`.
```

Also, [`src/class/methods.rs`] has utilities for `#[pyfunction]` and [`src/class/impl_.rs`] has
some internal tricks for making `#[pyproto]` flexible.

## Proc-macros
[`pyo3-macros`] provides six proc-macro APIs: `pymodule`, `pyproto`, `pyfunction`, `pyclass`,
`pymethods`, and `#[derive(FromPyObject)]`.

> [`pyo3-macros-backend`] has actual implementations of these APIs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[`pyo3-macros-backend`] has the actual implementations of these APIs.
```

<!-- This file contains a rough overview of the PyO3 codebase. -->
<!-- Please do not make descriptions too specific, so that we can easily -->
<!-- keep this file in sync with the codebase. -->

# PyO3: Architecture

This document roughly describes the high-level architecture of PyO3.
If you want to become familiar with the codebase you are in the right place!

## Overview

> PyO3 provides a bridge between Rust and Python, based on the [Python C/API].

Reviewer 3: `[Python C/API]` this link seems broken: https://github.com/PyO3/pyo3/blob/bbca585002a153125ab586725b9adcbb4bd8c273/Architecture.md

Reviewer 2: BTW, I think it should be "Python/C API" not "Python C/API".

Author: Thanks!

Thus, PyO3 has low-level bindings of these API as its core.
On top of that, we have higher-level bindings to operate Python objects safely.

> Also, to define Python classes and functions in Rust code, we have `trait PyClass<T>` and a set of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, to define Python classes and functions in Rust code, we have `trait PyClass` and a set of
```

protocol traits (e.g., `PyIterProtocol`) for supporting object protocols (i.e., `__dunder__` methods).
Since implementing `PyClass` requires lots of boilerplate, we have a proc-macro `#[pyclass]`.

> To summarize, there are five main parts to the PyO3 codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To summarize, there are six main parts to the PyO3 codebase.
```

1. [Low-level bindings of Python C/API.](#1-low-level-bindings-of-python-capi)
    - [`src/ffi`]
2. [Bindings to Python objects.](#2-bindings-to-python-objects)
    - [`src/instance.rs`] and [`src/types`]

> 3. [`PyClass<T>` and related functionalities.](#3-pyclasst-and-related-functionalities)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. [`PyClass` and related functionalities.](#3-pyclass-and-related-functionalities)
```

    - [`src/pycell.rs`], [`src/pyclass.rs`], and more
4. [Protocol methods like `__getitem__`.](#4-protocol-methods)
    - [`src/class`]
5. [Procedural macros to simplify usage for users.](#5-procedural-macros-to-simplify-usage-for-users)
    - [`src/derive_utils.rs`], [`pyo3-macros`] and [`pyo3-macros-backend`]
6. [`build.rs`](#6-buildrs)
    - [`build.rs`](https://github.com/PyO3/pyo3/tree/master/build.rs)

## 1. Low-level bindings of Python C/API
[`src/ffi`] contains wrappers of [Python C/API](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/).

We aim to provide straight-forward Rust wrappers resembling the file structure of
[`cpython/Include`](https://github.com/python/cpython/tree/v3.9.2/Include).

However, we still lack some APIs and are continuously updating the the module to match
the file contents upstream in CPython.
The tracking issue is [#1289](https://github.com/PyO3/pyo3/issues/1289), and contribution is welcome.

> In the [`src/ffi`] module, you see lots of feature gates such as `#[cfg(Py_LIMITED_API)]`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [`src/ffi`] module, there is lots of conditional compilation such as `#[cfg(Py_LIMITED_API)]`,
```

`#[cfg(Py_37)]`, and `#[cfg(PyPy)]`.
`Py_LIMITED_API` corresponds to `#define Py_LIMITED_API` macro in Python C/API.

> With `Py_LIMITED_API`, we can build Python-version-agnostic binary called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `Py_LIMITED_API`, we can build a Python-version-agnostic binary called an
```

Currently, `PyAny` is a straightforward wrapper of `ffi::PyObject`, defined as:
```rust
#[repr(transparent)]
pub struct PyAny(UnsafeCell<ffi::PyObject>);
```

All built-in types are defined as a C struct.
For example, `dict` is defined as:
```c
typedef struct {
    /* Base object */
    PyObject ob_base;
    /* Number of items in the dictionary */
    Py_ssize_t ma_used;
    /* Dictionary version */
    uint64_t ma_version_tag;
    PyDictKeysObject *ma_keys;
    PyObject **ma_values;
} PyDictObject;
```

However, we cannot access such a specific data structure with `#[cfg(Py_LIMITED_API)]` set.
Thus, all builtin objects are implemented as opaque types by wrapping `PyAny`, e.g.,:
```rust
#[repr(transparent)]
pub struct PyDict(PyAny);
```

Note that `PyAny` is not a pointer, and it is usually used as a pointer to the object in the
Python heap, as `&PyAny`.
This design choice can be changed
(see the discussion in [#1056](https://github.com/PyO3/pyo3/issues/1056)).

Since we need lots of boilerplate for implementing common traits for these types
(e.g., `AsPyPointer`, `AsRef<PyAny>`, and `Debug`), we have some macros in
[`src/types/mod.rs`].

> ## 3. `PyClass<T>` and related functionalities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 3. `PyClass` and related functionalities
```

Python C/API.
We provide a way to implement those protocols by using `#[pyproto]` and specific traits, such
as `PyIterProtocol`.
[`src/class`] defines these traits.
Each protocol method has a corresponding FFI function.
For example, `PyIterProtocol::__iter__` has
`pub unsafe extern "C" fn iter<T>(slf: *mut PyObject) -> *mut PyObject`.
When `#[pyproto]` finds that `T` implements `PyIterProtocol::__iter__`, it automatically
sets `iter<T>` on the type object of `T`.

Also, [`src/class/methods.rs`] has utilities for `#[pyfunction]` and [`src/class/impl_.rs`] has
some internal tricks for making `#[pyproto]` flexible.

## 5. Procedural macros to simplify usage for users.
[`pyo3-macros`] provides six proc-macro APIs: `pymodule`, `pyproto`, `pyfunction`, `pyclass`,
`pymethods`, and `#[derive(FromPyObject)]`.
[`pyo3-macros-backend`] has the actual implementations of these APIs.
[`src/derive_utils.rs`] contains some utilities used in code generated by these proc-macros,
such as parsing function arguments.

## 6. `build.rs`
PyO3's `build.rs` is relatively long (about 900 lines) to support some complex build cases.

> Here we list up some of its functionalities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a non-exhaustive list of its functionality:
```

> - Check if we are building a Python-extension or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check if we are building a Python extension.
```

>   - If we are building an extesion (e.g., Python library installable by `pip`),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If we are building an extension (e.g., Python library installable by `pip`),
```

  we don't link `libpython`.

>   Currently we use `extension-module` feature for this purpose, but it can change in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Currently we use the `extension-module` feature for this purpose. This may change in the future.
```

  See [#1123](https://github.com/PyO3/pyo3/pull/1123).
- Find the interpreter for build and detect the Python version.
  - We have to set some version flags like `Py_37`.

>   - Also, if the interpreter is PyPy, we set `PyPy`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If the interpreter is PyPy, we set `PyPy`.
```

- Cross-compiling support.
  - If `TARGET` architecture and `HOST` architecture differ, we find cross compile information

>   from environmental variable (`PYO3_CROSS_INCLUDE_DIR` and `PYO3_CROSS_PYTHON`) or system files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  from environment variables (`PYO3_CROSS_INCLUDE_DIR` and `PYO3_CROSS_PYTHON`) or system files.
```
